as the death toll in Palestine continues
to mount the United States maintains its
staunch support of Israel's war on Gaza
Washington's stance has come under heavy
criticism and some question why
Palestinian lives don't seem to be
valued in the same way as those of
victims of other conflicts so is there a
double standard when it comes to
Palestinian victims of war joining me to
discuss this are the authors of a recent
report on how islamophobia shapes US
foreign policy Sahar aiz is the
distinguished professor of Law and
Middle East legal studies at Ruckers
University and author of the racial
Muslim when racism quashes religious
freedom we're also joined by Mitchell
plitnik president of rethinking foreign
policy and co-director of Jewish voice
for peace he's also the author of accept
for Palestine the limits of progressive
politics of which I am of course a
co-author so good to see both of you
Sahar I'm going to start with you uh in
this report you two mentioned that
islamophobia is a ubiquitous ingredient
in US policy that's a provocative phrase
what do you mean a ubiquitous ingredient
essentially since 911 so over 22
years American foreign policy and
national security policies has been have
been centered around the vilification of
Muslims and the Muslim body and the
religion of Islam as terrorist violent
anti-American illiberal misogynistic and
also anti-Semitic and as a result the
entire Society has been primed and
socialized by the media by schools by
politicians and their rhetoric to
presume that Muslims are Outsiders
they're a threat and part of that
otherization of Muslims is this false
teaching of Americans that Muslims are
taught to hate Jews that Islam teaches
Muslims to hate Jews and that is racist
right and unfortunately then what
happens is when a Muslim or an Arab
wants to engage in human rights advocacy
wants to engage in foreign policy
dissent or critiques that in any way
criticize the state of Israel's
practices and policies or in any way
defend the Palestinians human rights
they're automatically placed in this
islamophobic Trope that oh your
motivations are anti-semitic they're not
actually liberal values to support human
rights for all people including
Palestinians how does this play out in
foreign policy Mitchell how does this
notion that Muslims are naturally uh
disposed toward homophobia illiberalism
barbarity Etc how does this stuff play
out in foreign policy well I think you
know one we're we're seeing a really
good example of it I think unfortunately
right now with the uh bombardment of
Gaza we the approach of American
lawmakers has been that Israel is
entitled to do what it uh what it is
doing um even if it even if they say
that it's causing a few too many
civilian casualties which is uh you know
frankly an important statement uh in its
minimization of the devastation in Gaza
um it it demonstrated how little uh
value is placed on Palestinian lives and
how easily is that because Palestinians
are r as Muslim because obviously the
Christians or Palestinian Jews yeah I
mean this is one of the things we
actually open the report by by saying
we're we're using islamophobia very
broadly and we're using it to include
anti-arab uh uh uh bigotry as well as
anti- Palestinian specifically anti-
Palestinian bigotry with the
understanding that uh it it's a
particular Dynamic and the islamophobic
tropes are applied to all Arabs but
right now we're seeing how easily that
uh um our political leaders are are just
treating Palestinian lives as disposable
and as worthless you know you can
contrast it with the statements about
the Hamas attack on uh on October 7th
where there is correct in in my view and
and absolutely Justified outrage at the
atrocities and the mass murder that was
committed on that day as there should be
because people are people are valuing
Israeli lives as all lives should be
valued we're not seeing the same thing
when it comes to the people of Gaza or
the people of the West Bank not seeing
anything like that and that is the
result of um years and years and years
of islamophobia anti-arab racism being
pumped into our discourse into our media
and into our policy discussions Sahar
I've also noticed the language that's
used to talk about Hamas versus the
language that's been used to talk about
the Israeli State people are very matter
of factly using words like barbaric
uncivilized to talk about Hamas and not
just Hamas but also people who are
living in Gaza so how does that kind of
language how does that kind of framing
help sort of
normalize the Israeli response in other
words if we to use Mitch language if we
see them as not human does it make it
easier to bomb them it does it make it
easier to see them as collateral damage
well history didn't start on October 7
and islamophobia didn't start even on in
2001 on 9911 so what the American
government has always done to persuade
its people to to support violence that
actually contradicts the very values
they're taught in schools which is
equality human rights human dignity
equal opportunity is to characterize the
enemy as barbaric Savage un civilized
and therefore this vilification of the
Muslim and the Arab and the Palestinian
must exist in order for Israel to Pro
proceive the unconditional support
because it's seen as an Outpost of White
America an outpost of European
civilization and the Palestinians are
seen as the extension of this pre- 911
and pre even colonial era of the Clash
of civilizations between the Christian
West and the Muslim East so all of this
is is
unsurprising I think what is shocking to
many of us who study this you know
checkered history is this degree in
which uh the Israelis are killing
Palestinians the rate at which they're
dying or being killed so the the war
crimes are clear by the Israeli side and
yes Hamas has committed war crimes too
but in contrast we condemn Hamas we
don't fund Hamas and we value the P the
Israeli victims and the hostages and
their lives but we treat the
Palestinians as if in the words of one
of the Israeli officials as human
animals and shame on us for doing that
the we and the US that you're referring
to is the United States and this comes
up in the report as well Mitchell
because you talk about a radicalized
double standard which is quote most
acute for Muslim or Arab Americans when
they exercise their free speech rights
to criticize the US government's failure
to hold uh Israel accountable for its
actions uh could you elaborate on what
you mean uh when you all say a
radicalized double standard I think we
saw a great example of that in Congress
um
yeah just a few weeks ago you know
centuring a member of the house is a
rare occurrence um outside uh six people
six people and three of them were were
um were people who supported the
Confederacy right so outside of that
issue there's Rashida Tali the only
palestinian-american in Congress became
only the third uh um uh person to be
censured um and what was she censured
for essentially Rashida was censured for
standing up for Palestinian rights this
is exact exactly what we're talking
about when I and and Rashida is a Muslim
um and she uh spoke up for her people um
I think this is a an absolutely Sterling
example of what we're talking about in
the report that if you are Muslim you
are you are going to be uh you're going
to be censured for for speaking of for
human rights and you're particularly
going to be accused of anti-Semitism if
you stand up for Palestinian rights this
is the irony of the of what is being
done the uh the accusation against
Rashid Talib for um that that she is
anti-Semitic because she stood up for
Palestinian rights that is itself
anti-Semitism because it presumes that
that jewishness is aligned with the
violence of the Israel St EXA and and
and essentially stigmatizes anyone who
stands up for Universal human rights
because there is supposed to be as as as
was put in our book um an exception for
Palestine that and that again is
anti-Semitic because you are you are
somehow singling this is where you're
singling out Jewish people for special
treatment and while it looks like you're
doing us a favor what you're actually
doing is fomenting resentment we have
seen this repeated throughout
particularly European Jewish history
where Jews get certain protections from
the ruling class for a certain amount of
time and when there's uh pressure on
that ruling class and they want to shift
blame to the Jews they say look how how
they took advantage of you and look how
much better they had it while you were
suffering in your peasantry this is the
same Dynamic repeating itself um and
it's using Palestinian blood to do it
which makes it I think a double crime so
Sahar you say Muslims and Jews are often
pitted against each other in what you
call a zero sum game what do you mean
well Jews and Muslims are not raised or
taught to hate each other and in fact if
we were to talk about the history of the
experiences of the Jewish people people
you would find that their treatment was
much much better in Muslim majority
countries than it was in Christian
majority countries and in Europe but
also they share many values either based
on secular political ideological
commitments or even religious
commitments and when you uh when you
define incorrectly anti-Semitism as
opposition to a political ideology in
this case political Zionism or if you
define anti-Semitism incorrectly as an
opposition to a state's practices and
policies in this case the state of
Israel what you do is you create a
unnecessary false wedge between Muslims
and Jews soah does does the recent house
resolution make this even more
complicated because I hear what you're
saying I hear what both of you are
saying right which is this isn't that
hard anti-Semitism is the hatred and
violence against Jews for being Jewish
and then there are critiques of Israel
there are questions about uh Zionism Etc
which are different uh there is a very
real rise in anti-Semitism that has
occurred around the world uh both before
October 7th and certainly afterward but
then you have a house resolution house
resolution 894 which explicitly states
that the that anti-zionism is
anti-Semitism uh is that dangerous and
if so why this resolution
reflects politics in America it reflects
the one decided uh support for a
particular country and our politicians
opposition to the human rights human
dignity of the Palestinian people if you
look at the organizations that are
tracking the amount of uh hate incidents
and ciil rights discrimination cases and
complaints by Muslim and Arab students
in colleges and workplaces the Council
on American Islamic relations for
example the Arab American
Anti-Defamation committee Muslim
Advocates there are numerous nonprofit
organizations that serve Muslim Arab
South Asian communities and they have
shown that the number of hate incidents
and bias incidents has risen by almost
by over 200% in the last eight months
why isn't Congress concerned about that
population of American citizens so I
think it's telling that they have abs
they seem to care about religious
bigotry but only for one group and then
they misde Define it and they don't care
about religious bigotry against Muslims
when it is rising at an equally
startling level in the United States all
right that'll have to be the last word
there Sahar aiz Mitchell plitnik thanks
so much for joining me on up front all
right everyone that is our show up front
we'll be back next
week